Multivariable Problems Project Reflection

It’s not atypical to lack the visual or spatial understanding to comprehend particular concepts in multivariable calculus, and MATLAB’s visualization tools often a great solution. However, MATLAB is for all intents and purposes a programming language designed for computations, and it’s often practical to design functions to solve particular common types of problems. I chose four particular homework problems (or groups of problems) to solve using MATLAB. The first of these is used to not only find the second-order partial derivative of a function, but also ensure that the second-order derivative is the same whether it is taken with respect to x, and then y, or y, and then x. It outputs a matrix of these two values, which should always be the same. After figuring out how to solve these problems, I tried something slightly trickier—finding the integral of a vector function given an initial condition. The premise of the program is that the “+C” value can be viewed as the difference that has to be made up between the already-integrated function and the initial condition. Thus, the vector attained from subtracting the vector you get from the initial condition gives the “+C” term, which can simply be added to the integrated vector. This function is very useful for finding, for example, the velocity of an object given an acceleration function, or the position of an object given a velocity function. After I found out about the concept of the line integral and noticing its many applications in calculus-based physics, I thought it would be useful to program a function that solves for it automatically. The function multiplies a parametrically defined function by the arc length formula and integrates it after substituting in functions in terms of t for x and y. Finally, I programmed a function that computes the divergence and curl of a given vector field. This involved partial differentiation, and understanding gradient operators, and knowing how to find the determinant of a matrix using minors. The function outputs the divergence and curl of a given vector field in a matrix. Through doing this project, I learned how to use symbolic variables in MATLAB, as well as how to solve a variety of multivariable problems efficiently. Doing this also reinforced some concept I learned in single-variable calculus and even precalculus.
 
